Brothers and sisters, the message of
today's Gospel that we heard revolves
around two themes: humility and pride.
I believe we all struggle with these
weaknesses and sins, because each of us
wants to be first, each of us wants to
be in the top position, each of us wants
to show off, and this is somehow always
more pronounced in humans than humility.
Humility can best be seen in many saints.
However, to understand today's gospel
or this comparison between humility
and pride, we need to look at two
images from the Holy Scriptures.
If we go to the book of Genesis, chapter
three, we will see Adam who became proud,
who took a place that did not belong to
him, because he wanted to be like God.
Therefore, he wanted to
essentially decide to be God.
And immediately we see that he took the
first place which was not meant for him.
That is why the master casts him out,
and we know that he was cast out and
realized that he was naked and nothing.
However, the second image that can help
us, the positive one, is Jesus himself.
In one place in the Holy Scripture, it
says, "He, being in the form of God,
did not consider equality with God
something to be grasped, but emptied
himself, taking the form of a servant."
So Jesus who comes, the Son of God, who
deserves the first place, renounces it.
He renounces it and takes the last
place, takes the cross on which,
like Adam, he is stripped, naked,
spat upon, mocked, and betrayed.
Here, brothers and sisters, from these
two images, we can see for ourselves which
path we should take, which place we want
to be in, and what we want to achieve.
Do we really want to be the ones who always
impose themselves first, who are full of
themselves, who only believe in themselves,
or do we want to follow Jesus' example?
These two images not only show
us the path we should take.
Did you listen carefully to the first
reading from the Book of Sirach?
There, we all receive the code, the
guidance, on which path to take and how.
So, you probably didn't notice, so I'll
read that sentence again, and it says,
when a father advises his son on what
to do, he tells him this: the greater
you are, the more humble you should be.
The greater you are, the
more humble you should be.
Tonight, when you get a chance, that's
the third chapter of the Book of Sirach,
write that sentence down somewhere.
It's not a problem to be great, it's not a
problem to be someone, but it is a problem if
that great someone doesn't humble themselves.
You have so many wonderful
successful people—scientists,
artists, businesspeople—who are,
as they say, great individuals.
I don't know if you've had the opportunity
to talk to such people, but the greater they
are, the more humble and simple they are.
Sometimes, in conversations with
these people, we are surprised when we
know who they are and what they have
achieved, and when you approach them,
you see that they are truly humble.
And that's why Sirach says, the greater you
are, the more you should humble yourself.
It's not a problem to be great.
The problem is if you are arrogant and
if you want to be something you are not.
So, what is the issue here?
The issue is how we measure our
greatness, our worth, and what
place we think we should take.
Should we become arrogant
or humble ourselves?
That's why Sirach warns, the greater you
are, the more you should humble yourself.
We see this many times in the Holy Scripture.
When Mary experienced the Annunciation
and proclaimed her Magnificat, there is a
sentence where she says, "He has brought
down the mighty from their thrones and
exalted those of humble estate." Those
who are humble will always be rewarded.
And there is no worry in that.
If you are going through something
like Jesus on the cross, who humbled
himself, gave up the first place, and
took the last place, God exalted him.
Where did He place Him?
At His right hand.
So we too, brothers and sisters,
sometimes struggle a lot, worrying about
ourselves, but let God be glorified.
If we are humble, God will turn everything
for the good and place us where we
need to be, along with our plans,
projects, ideas, and even our lives.
If you are humble, there
is room for God to work.
But we make the biggest mistakes when we
are arrogant and make decisions on our own.
And where do we see this
and how do we see it?
A little while ago, I said this
sentence: the greater you are,
the more humble you should be.
And the one who knows they are great—do
you think Jesus didn't know his greatness?
Yet, knowing his greatness, he humbled
himself, took up the cross, and went
through everything he needed to go through.
Why wasn't that a problem for Jesus?
Because he was self-aware.
He knew his worth, who
he was, and what he was.
Do you know who gets the most arrogant today?
It's not the narcissistic
people who are tall.
The problematic narcissistic individuals
aren't the big ones, but the empty ones.
Why?
Because a narcissistic person is empty.
That's why they constantly seek applause,
why they want to be in first place, why
they always strive for some kind of success.
Why?
Because if they face opposition, it
means they've lost their foundation, and
you keep validating them with applause,
pushing them to the top, because they lack
inner confidence in who they are, what
kind of person they are, and their worth.
And that's why narcissistic people...
They constantly need to be in first place,
constantly need praise, because as soon as
it's not like that, they go into crisis.
They need our validation.
They will do anything just to be praised.
And then you see, my dears, how
easy it is to understand this.
So, a narcissistic and arrogant person
is often someone who is conceited and
empty, who knows they are not worth much.
And they are afraid of
that within themselves.
However, we Christians do not
evaluate ourselves based on who can
define our worth if we were to look
through the lens of psychology.
Instead, we see through different eyes,
spiritual ones, and that is Jesus.
He is our measure.
If His life, which was invaluable, was
freely given to die on the cross for us,
then you see what makes our lives valuable.
Through Jesus' sacrifice.
See how much we are worth.
Sometimes it seems easy to say
that we were dearly bought.
This means we have dignity
because we are children of God.
And we are worth as much as we are
worth before God and nothing more.
None of us here is worth more because of
our abilities, having a doctorate, owning a
company, or being successful in this or that.
No.
Each of us is worth only as
much as we are worth before God.
Saint Francis knew this very well.
We are worth as much as
we are worth before God.
Therefore, we have no right
to be arrogant or prideful.
Why?
What do you have that you
did not receive from God?
Even if you have some ability or are good
at something, it is all a gift from God.
But in this way, you can become so proud
that you fall away from your Creator who
made you that way or gave you that gift.
Why?
Sometimes we obstruct the logic of salvation.
As I just said, when we are not humble,
God cannot do anything through us.
If you have those talents or some
abilities or whatever, they are given
to you to multiply, to make use of.
Remember those talents.
So, why boast that you're good
at this or that, when you know
everything is given to you by God?
And it's given to you for the building
up of the church, your family,
your community, or anything else.
In the end, where can we see this best?
We have all come to this table.
That's why I always say how important
this table is, not the doors below.
So, because the Eucharist takes place
here, the living Jesus is made present.
And who has Jesus invited here today?
In this church, no one deserves
either the first or the last place.
There is a beautiful saying by a
saint, I can't remember who said it.
None of you are so holy that you
should stay outside the church.
None of you are so sinful outside
the church that you cannot enter it.
Because Jesus has called all of us.
He has invited all of us to His feast.
And that is the most beautiful thing.
There is no first, second, or third place.
We are all equal, and if we are even
a little humble, we will realize that
we are sinful and that it is a gift
to be able to be around His table, to
partake in Him, even though we are still
flawed, still sinning, still falling.
But we know that Jesus has invited all of
us to the Lamb's feast and to awaken in us
that desire to be humble and to long for
that living city, the living church, the
glorified Jerusalem, as the Holy Scripture
says, so that we can all participate there.
That is why, brothers and sisters,
humility is important to us.
Have you ever thought about
how casually we come to church?
We receive communion, partake
in the body and blood of Christ.
Do we ever think, do I deserve this?
It is a gift.
Am I worthy enough to be proud before God,
thinking I am holy or good or something?
Attributing to ourselves perhaps some mild
or small, I don't know, values or merits.
No matter how weak we are, whenever
we look at Jesus and His humility,
we too should reflect that.
A Christian cannot be humble, give up the
first places and glory, and leave behind what
is said, "the greater you are, the more you
should humble yourself," if they do not have
a well-developed relationship with Jesus.
The first fruit of such a
relationship is gratitude.
I don't know about your feelings, but
sometimes when I confess, I come out of
the confessional, and I just want to kneel
before the cross, bow my head, and not move.
Because, as you might say, you are
in a state of gratitude because you
can't believe that God has shown
you love and mercy again, washed you
clean again, brought you back again.
I always say this, whether in church or
anywhere else, we can observe one another.
It's beautiful when you see
someone who is grateful to God
and aware of their own weaknesses.
Why?
When a person doesn't get puffed up.
When a person isn't so arrogant.
Last Sunday, I preached about this.
He focuses on himself.
And brother, whenever any of us starts
focusing on ourselves and looks honestly
in the mirror, we might start to cry.
But precisely that, encountering
the truth, is held by God's love.
No matter how bad I am, God loves me.
He will pull me out.
He will renew me.
That's when humility comes in.
Remember the prodigal son when he
says, "Oh, I came to my senses."
How beautiful it is to see those new
converts when they come to their senses.
Those constant tears, that continuous
gratitude to God for finding them at
any stage of life, it's beautiful.
That is God's grace.
Here, brothers and everyone,
that's why we are called.
That humility is not just a
mantra, nor should it be fake.
I'm sorry to say, but my people, there
is a lot of false humility in the church.
A learned pattern for
humility is not humility.
What I told you, looking like
this, that's not humility.
Thank God for your gestures and everything,
but by the fruits of the Holy Spirit,
by the fruits of the Holy Spirit.
For example, I can look like an angel
in church, but then on the steps or
in the parking lot, I attack someone.
Haven't I told you many times how
often I've seen arguments in the
confession line on St. Anthony's day?
And everyone humbly stands in line
for confession with their rosaries,
but God forbid you take their spot.
Oh, but then you see the
fire ignite from within.
Is that the fruit of the Holy Spirit?
The fruit of the Holy Spirit is peace.
The fruit of the Holy Spirit is patience.
Okay, it's not right.
Someone got ahead of you.
Someone took something from you.
Someone deceived you,
humiliated you, offended you.
How do we react?
What flares up inside us?
What we can learn from Jesus, let them
be free, what we can learn from Jesus is
precisely that He remained silent, that
He endured, that He bore it, knowing
that He did it out of pure love for us.
And one of the great aspects of
Jesus' humility is precisely that.
He knew the value of His life,
yet He still gave it for us.
Jesus gave His life to us, knowing its worth.
We, as Christian believers and people,
if we know our own worth, are also
called to give ourselves to others.
In any way, each in their own
state, mission, or calling.
But the meaning of our lives, if we
are aware of how valuable we are.
What we can do, as the Scripture and the
prophet Sirach say, is humble ourselves
and do something for God and for others,
and not just think about ourselves.
Amen.